Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Kevin O'Donnell, Jr.,
a Yale graduate who still lives in New Haven, started writing short stories in
the early 70s. After writing nearly 100 short stories, O'Donnell moved on to
writing novels, and so far he's written six. These include Bandersnatch,
Mayflies, War of Omission, and the Journeys of McGill-Feehan series, Caverns,
Reefs, and Lava. O'Donnell spent a good deal of time in Korea before and after
college, and he majored in Chinese studies at college. We asked him if having
lived in the Orient influences his writing. It hit me on a couple of different
levels. One is, this is more true, I think, of Americans who live in Asia than
those who live in Europe or South America. Because in Asia, you're very
conscious of the fact that you're a foreigner. I mean, you're racially
different. You do not have black hair and dark brown eyes. Everywhere you walk,
people look at you, especially in some of the more rural areas of the country,
like Korea, where the last time they saw an American was during the war, 20
years ago, 20 years before I was there. They are unabashed in their curiosity,
and it really encounters the self-consciousness in the American to constantly be
stared at, to have people touching you, to see if you feel the same as a Korean
does. So I think that's affecting my science fiction writing and how a person
feels when he's among aliens. At the same time, Asian languages and cultures are
significantly different from Western cultures in terms of the way they view
almost everything. And although it's not really an alien psychology, it's
sufficiently different that it gives me sort of an insight into how a sentient
being from Rigel or whatever could view things differently, could take a really
far-out perspective on something we just take for granted.
Mayflies Mayflies is O'Donnell's second novel. It's the story of a generation
ship conveying thousands of settlers to a far destination. But the focus is on
the computer that guides the ship. You see, its core is a living human brain.
That is, retain the memories of the time it was in the body of Dr. Gerard
Metaklura. O'Donnell explains the genesis of this concept. Mayflies started out
as, actually
it was a workshop exercise. I was at the time in a workshop here in New Haven.
And we had to do a, oh, I forget, a two-paragraph description of someone. And I
described this character, Metaklura, who took more than the two paragraphs to
describe. He ran on for about a page and all of a sudden he died. And I took it
into the workshop and people said, well, yes, those are nice paragraphs and very
good description. But boy, what have you done here? You know, you've created a
character and then killed them. What a waste. I got angry and said, well, you
know, maybe I've killed them, but it's not a waste. But I can make something of
them. And they said, we dare you. And pretty soon Mayflies was underway with me
trying to prove he could write a book about a protagonist who died on page one.
And have that protagonist a very vital part of the entire story, rather than
just a haunting memory. The only way to do that was, of course, to somehow keep
him alive. And one thing led to another. And the next thing I knew, Metaklura
was a central computer on the good ship Mayflower. On our next show, we'll talk
more with Kevin O'Donnell Jr.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Bandersnatch, science fiction author Kevin
O'Donnell Jr.'s first novel, made his paperback appearance in 1979. The first
half of Bandersnatch depicts a 22nd century America deeply divided between the
haves and the have-nots. A burgeoning bureaucracy strangles the have-nots. In
five of O'Donnell's novels, the protagonist must contend with stultifying
bureaucracies. When we ask O'Donnell if this represents a personal view, this is
what he told us. I really see it happening not only here, but pretty much
everywhere where governments have been in power for any length of time. I think
it's the nature of the beast. It's a bureaucracy of any sort, whether it's
governmental, corporate, academic. It achieves a goal beyond its stated purpose.
It acquires a new goal in that that goal is to survive, to perpetuate itself, to
expand, to get fat and strong and secure.
It goes all the way back to Parkinson's law. Work expands to fill the time
available, and when it has, you hire two assistants.
I think this is an inevitable trend in any bureaucracy, whether it's Western
-style capitalism or Maoist communism. You know, one of Mao's big campaigns was
against bureaucracy. He was constantly railing against the way that no matter
what he said, no matter what he did, the bureaucracy kept growing. It kept
issuing new regulations and new rules, and here he was, the most powerful man in
China, and he couldn't affect the bureaucracy. So yeah, that's a very personal
sore point with me. A primitive planet is the setting for the second half of
Bandersnatch. In a climactic struggle, the protagonist, also known as
Bandersnatch, kills a monstrous bear-like alien which has attacked him. Then he
discovers the alien has a young cub, which for some reason befriends him and
becomes his sidekick. O'Donnell told us that the appearance and character of the
cub were unplanned. It just sprang into being. Baby bear actually came about
almost entirely by accident. I had had Bandersnatch wandering through this alien
jungle, and
I realized he needed like a, the way the story was going, he had to have this
climactic battle sequence with a natural force, some sort of wild animal. And I
hadn't had any wild animals, and they're really big enough for him.
All of a sudden, off the page came this monstrous bear-like animal that almost
loomed up before him and started attacking him. And well, he won, and there I
was with a dead bear on the ground. And just sort of somehow my fingers kept
going, and there was a sound from the distance, and it was the cub. And the next
thing I knew, he had a sidekick, as you put it. That was just accidental,
really. Sidekicks are common in science fiction and fantasy. Here O'Donnell
comments on the role of a sidekick. I think it helps when the protagonist has a
sidekick of some sort.
When you're writing science fiction, well, you know, why not give the hero an
alien sidekick, Sam in the McGill-Feehan series? I think it lets you do a little
exploring into alien psychology, and at the same time, it lets you keep making
sort of mirror-like observations of human culture. More with Kevin O'Donnell Jr.
on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa
College in Odessa College in Odessa College. Coming up next is the Science
Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s science fiction
novel, War of Omission, was published in 1982. In the book, O'Donnell describes
a violent revolution which takes place in late 20th century America. This
revolution begins in the Northeast. O'Donnell presents the thoughts and actions
of the participants on both sides of the revolution. We asked him what he was
trying to get across in War of Omission. The modern-day recapitulation of the
statement that power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
Sort of, I was trying to say, hey, you know, it's real easy to say that, you
know, the system stinks and we'll wipe it out. But what happens when you do wipe
it out? You know, I think this is where every revolutionary since, you know, the
French in 1787 has screwed up thoroughly. They say, well, you know, the present
system is corrupt and it's bloated and it stinks and let's throw it out and
we'll have paradise. I think that's stupid. I'm not a defender of the system,
but I think the sort of sweeping, burn it down just doesn't work because, you
know, you wind up building on rubble. You don't move into a structure that you
can clean up and straighten out. I mean, you've got ashes. And I think really
those two things were what the book was all about. The science fictional element
in War of Omission is the tisser, a weapon the revolutionaries perfect, which
wipes out all objects in the target area instantaneously. It makes these objects
disappear. Right, but it does something else as well. It wipes out the memory of
the target area from everyone's minds. So if a person's house and family were
deleted by a tisser, neither he nor anyone else would have any memory of them.
Most of the action, especially tisser deletions, takes place in New Haven, the
city where O'Donnell now lives. We asked O'Donnell if he enjoyed writing scenes
in which New Haven gets destroyed. That generated an interesting sidelight. I
was sort of offended by my publisher that they cut some references in there. We
have a building here in town. It's the Knights of Columbus building, and I think
it's possibly the ugliest structure ever erected anywhere in America. It's a
huge, towering, ugly brick building with massive
turrets at each of the four corners of the building. I mean, it looks like it
was designed to hold off an attack by, you know, maddened archers. And I took
great pleasure in destroying that in the book, having it totally obliterated
from the face of the earth. And at one point I had a character bring it back and
change his mind. It was so ugly.
The concept of the tisser is the heart of War of Omission. O'Donnell told us he
put a lot of effort to make the tisser believable. Well, the hardest part was
trying to make it plausible. And a review or two has appeared that, you know,
has really faulted the book on those grounds. But, you know, for whatever
reason, that person just did not believe the tisser. And I put so much effort
into trying to make it believable. I think I put more effort into that than any
other part of the book, trying to make it seem very natural and trying to
provide possible explanations for why this happened. Sort of brief meditations
on the nature of reality. For those who accepted the explanation, who believed
the tisser, I think the book worked. And I think if you can't believe it, the
book just falls flat. The tisser is believable, and War of Omission works. We'll
look at Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s Journeys of McGill-Feehan series on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been
the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science Fiction author Kevin O'Donnell Jr.
has written many short stories, plus six novels to date. Three of his novels
form a series. The series is called The Journeys of McGill-Feehan, and the three
installments are subtitled Caverns, Reefs, and Lava. McGill-Feehan is a 21st
century earthling who, at age four days, is swallowed by a mysterious, giant,
amoeba-like gastropod, which was sent by the even more mysterious, far-being,
Retz-Glaran. The infant McGill remains in the gastropod precisely 71 hours and
24 minutes. Then he is discharged, and the gastropod leaves the earth with no
comment. McGill seems to be a normal lad. At age five, however, it is discovered
that he has the flinger talent, the extremely rare ability to transmit people or
objects instantaneously to distant destinations in the galaxy, providing the
total mass of any load doesn't exceed 918 kilograms. Young McGill is enrolled in
the Flinger Academy, where he masters the art under the tutelage of experienced
flingers. Then at age 17, he is certified as a flinger. But since McGill is
puzzled about the motive of the far-being for having the gastropod swallow him
for three days, he vows to seek out the far-being and ask him why. Another group
is interested in McGill, too, the organization. They reason that if the far
-being has something in store for McGill, then they want it, too. The stage is
set. Young McGill is mastering flinging while simultaneously learning about such
things in life as romance, trying to live with the flinger bureaucracy, and
searching for the far-being, all the while the sinister organization is after
him. The series is obviously humorous, but it's serious as well. Here O'Donnell
comments on his intention for the series. Well, my primary intent in the McGill
fan series is to do something light, fast-paced, adventuresome, that nonetheless
shows
a person of incredible talent growing up and the problems he faces.
It's that aspect of it tends to take lower priority. I think the adventures of
McGill fan come first. I do want a book that people can sit down and read
quickly and really enjoy. And it's not a gloomy book. Bandersnatch and War of
Omission are sort of downbeat books. Nathlons is, in a way, upbeat, but it's got
a lot of depressing stuff in it. Whereas McGill fan is, it's not. I do it partly
as a change of pace to write a book that just moves right along from the start
to finish and has a lot of things happening.
In the first
book, Caverns, McGill takes charge of a Rangan egg which hatches in book two,
Reefs. He names the young reptilian Rangan Sam, and Sam becomes McGill's
sidekick. Here O'Donnell comments on Sam's role. Poor Sam. I mean, he's going to
grow up so mixed up because he's being raised entirely on Earth. Well, except
for their excursions off world, but he's being raised by a human being, very
human values. But Sam is not human. When he gets to maturity, he's going to be,
oh heavens, from the tip of his nose to the tip of his tail, he's going to be
about 15 feet long, and he's going to stand about, oh, what, four and a half
feet high at the shoulder? The back part of him, and his head will be, you know,
pretty much about six feet off the ground. I mean, he's going to be big. He's
going to be very alien-looking, and he's going to have a lot of trouble because
he's neither one nor the other. He's not a Rangan. He knows nothing of Rangan
culture. But he is not and can never be a human being. I see lots of interesting
problems ahead for Sam. More on Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s The Journeys of McGill
Feehan next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
up to suivre the PauseC MJ compare. We also haveiste 90, the opportunities
loaded withει, and from the one where thee instructors want to move. This is the
явity family member of the Notre Lariat, who's a leader with a mom. We all set
up for you in Rome. We all set people to receive an image. Just put it up in
your kids and then they need help.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s science fiction
series, The Journeys of McGill Feehan, is a highly popular adventure yarn
featuring the young flinger, McGill Feehan, who, after having developed his
talent, is searching for the far being. Not only must young Feehan cope with his
talent, and life in general, he must avoid being captured by the organization.
The series is humorous, but interspersed among the action and humor are the
violent deaths of many of McGill's allies and friends, including his parents,
his lovers, and his roommates. We asked O'Donnell why he so freely dispatches
with most of McGill's acquaintances. Part of that is cold calculation on my
part, that when you're writing a series, one of the real difficulties is
convincing the reader that your hero is in danger. When you write one book,
there's no problem, because the reader doesn't know how it's going to come out.
But when you have a series, the reader says, Well, hey, look, you know, he's
been through 18 of these adventures now, and he's emerged unscathed from every
one, so why worry? And, you know, the reader's emotional involvement in the
story is lessened. But when there is a real danger, when people near and dear to
him are dying, and in some cases dying horribly, it brings the threat much
closer. It makes it much more plausible. And at this point, McGill has lost a
lot of people who are very close to him. His parents, Nadia and Graystein, he's
going to lose more. And, you know, as I say, part of it is cold calculation, but
part of it is also realistic appraisal of the situation fans in. He's got this
talent, he's got this mysterious link with this even more mysterious alien
being, and he has people hot on his trail.
And it streams, you know, readers' credibility to have not only Finn, but all
his friends coming through safe and sound every time. You know, the
organization, they may not be perfect, but they're not total amateurs, and
they're going to be striking real close to home. And they have so far in the
first three books, and they'll continue to. McGill encounters several types of
aliens on his journeys. We ask O'Donnell for what purpose does he use alien
characters in the series. In the fan series, I'm trying to make aliens who are
comprehensible,
and yet who are not human. I really think when we run into alien species, and
sooner or later we will, they will have traits which we recognize as traits that
we have. Now, in Lava, I've got these religious fanatics running around. I
suspect that any sentient race we encounter will, at least in one stage of their
development, have gone through an intensely religious period. It might still be
religious today, if you can tell, that I think any sentient being has to wonder
on its origin, how it came to be, why it came to be, who created the universe.
So, you know, I'm trying to, not to mirror humanity,
but to suggest that there are alternates with which we can have traits,
attitudes in common. So far, O'Donnell has written three books in the McGill
-Feehan series. Here's what O'Donnell said when we asked him if there would be
any more in the series. Yes, definitely. At the moment, it's a McGill story, and
it's from his childhood, it's been published in Berkeley Showcase. There will be
more Feehan books. At the moment, I'm saying seven more, and the series will
end. So, I'm glad to at least ten. Kevin O'Donnell Jr. will keep us entertained
with the adventures of McGill-Feehan for at least a while longer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,